Add Waku v2 plan (#23)
vacp2p/vacp2p.github.io: _posts/2020-07-01-waku-v2-pitch.md

# Table of Contents

1.  [Problem](#org0c3be09)
2.  [Appetite](#org4293ad1)
3.  [Solution](#org255ac65)
    1.  [Baseline](#org9f0408b)
    2.  [Track 1 - Move to libp2p](#org900b26a)
        1.  [1. FloodSub](#org26e8b86)
        2.  [2. Simplify the protocol](#org978176b)
        3.  [3. Core integration](#orgfe0c903)
        4.  [4. Topic interest behavior](#orgfe0c904)
        5.  [5. Historical message caching](#org636ca90)
        6.  [6. Waku v1 <> Libp2p bridge](#orgc021c69)
    3.  [Track 2 - Better routing](#org30053d1)
        1.  [1. GossipSub](#org5a2c87e)
        2.  [2. Topic sharding](#org9adde90)
        3.  [3. Other factors](#org90aa712)
    4.  [Track 3 - Accounting and user-run nodes](#org3b38a9b)
        1.  [1. Adaptive nodes and capabilities](#org92e8676)
        2.  [2. Accounting](#org376e97f)
        3.  [3. Relax high availability requirement](#org18fd27b)
        4.  [4. Incentivize light and full nodes to tell the truth (policy, etc)](#orge9bb567)
        5.  [5. Settlement PoC](#org5b0cf19)
4.  [Out of scope](#orgc50fab1)

> <a id="org0c3be09"></a>

Reviewer: ditto.

Author: removed

****2. Bandwidth as a bottleneck****. We notice that memory usage appears to not be
the primary bottleneck for full nodes, and the bottleneck is still bandwidth. To support 10k DAU, and full nodes with an amplification factor of 25 the required Internet speed is ~50 Mbps, which is a fast home Internet connection. For ~100k DAU only cloud-operated nodes can keep up (500 Mbps). See Fig 3-5.

****3. Amplification factors****. Reducing amplification factors with better routing, would have a high impact, but it is likely we'd need additional measures as well, such as topic sharding or similar. See Fig 8-13.

Figure 1-5:

![](assets/img/status_scaling_model_fig1.png)
![](assets/img/status_scaling_model_fig2.png)
![](assets/img/status_scaling_model_fig3.png)
![](assets/img/status_scaling_model_fig4.png)
![](assets/img/status_scaling_model_fig5.png)

> See <https://colab.research.google.com/drive/1Fz-oxRxxAFPpM1Cowpnb0nT52V1-yeRu#scrollTo=Yc3417FUJJ_0> for the full report.

Reviewer: do we want to share this link?

Author: why not?

# Table of Contents

1.  [Problem](#org0c3be09)
2.  [Appetite](#org4293ad1)
3.  [Solution](#org255ac65)
    1.  [Baseline](#org9f0408b)
    2.  [Track 1 - Move to libp2p](#org900b26a)
        1.  [1. FloodSub](#org26e8b86)
        2.  [2. Simplify the protocol](#org978176b)
        3.  [3. Core integration](#orgfe0c903)
        4.  [4. Topic interest behavior](#orgfe0c904)
        5.  [5. Historical message caching](#org636ca90)
        6.  [6. Waku v1 <> Libp2p bridge](#orgc021c69)
    3.  [Track 2 - Better routing](#org30053d1)
        1.  [1. GossipSub](#org5a2c87e)
        2.  [2. Topic sharding](#org9adde90)
        3.  [3. Other factors](#org90aa712)
    4.  [Track 3 - Accounting and user-run nodes](#org3b38a9b)
        1.  [1. Adaptive nodes and capabilities](#org92e8676)
        2.  [2. Accounting](#org376e97f)
        3.  [3. Relax high availability requirement](#org18fd27b)
        4.  [4. Incentivize light and full nodes to tell the truth (policy, etc)](#orge9bb567)
        5.  [5. Settlement PoC](#org5b0cf19)
4.  [Out of scope](#orgc50fab1)
5.  [Next steps](#org1414f44)

<a id="org0c3be09"></a>

# Problem

The Waku network is fragile and doesn't scale.

> As Status is moving into a user-acquisition phase and is improving retention rates for users we need the infrastructure to keep up, specifically when it comes to messaging.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As [Status](https://status.im) is moving into a user-acquisition phase and is improving retention rates for users they need the infrastructure to keep up, specifically when it comes to messaging.
```

> Based on user acquisition models, our initial goal is to support 100k DAU in September, with demand growing from there.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Based on user acquisition models, the initial goal is to support 100k DAU in September, with demand growing from there.
```

What we need to do is:

1.  Reduce amplification factors
2.  Get more user-run full nodes

Doing this means the Waku network will be able to scale, and doing so in the right way, in a robust fashion. What would a fragile way of scaling be? Increasing our reliance on a Status Pte Ltd operated cluster which would paint us in a corner where we:

-   keep increasing requirements for Internet speed for full nodes
-   are vulnerable to censorship and attacks
-   have to control the topology in an artifical manner to keep up with load
-   basically re-invent a traditional centralized client-server app with extra steps
-   deliberately ignore most of our principles
-   risk the network being shut down when we run out of cash

<a id="org4293ad1"></a>

# Appetite

Our initial risk appetite for this is 6 weeks for a small team.

The idea is that we want to make tangible progress towards the goal in a limited period of time, as opposed to getting bogged down in trying to find a theoretically perfect generalized solution. Fixed time, variable scope.

It is likely some elements of a complete solution will be done separately. See later sections for that.

> <a id="org255ac65"></a>

Reviewer: what is this?

Author: org mode links for clicks, removing

# Solution

There are two main parts of the solution. One is to reduce amplification factors, and the other is incentivization to get more user run full nodes with desktop, etc.

What does a full node provide? It provides connectivity to the network, can act as a bandwidth "barrier" and be high or reasonably high availability. What this means right now is essentially topic interest and storing historical messages.

The goal is here to improve the status quo, not get a perfect solution from the get go. All of this can be iterated on further, for stronger guarantees, as well as replaced by other new modules.

Let's first look at the baseline, and then go into some of the tracks and their phases. Track 1 is best done first, after which track 2 and 3 can be executed in parallel. Track 1 gives us more options for track 2 and 3. The work in track 1 is currently more well-defined, so it is likely the specifics of track 2 and 3 will get refined at a later stage.

> <a id="org9f0408b"></a>

Reviewer: ditto

For light nodes:

-   if they don't, they get disconnected
-   prepayment (especially to "high value" nodes)

For full nodes:

-   multiple nodes reporting to agree, where truth becomes a shelling point
-   use eigentrust
-   staking for discovery visibility with slashing

<a id="org5b0cf19"></a>

### 5. Settlement PoC

Can be done after phase 2 if so desired. Basically integrate payments based on accounting and policy.

<a id="orgc50fab1"></a>

# Out of scope

1.  We assume the Status Base model requirements are accurate.
2.  We assume Core will improve retention rates.
3.  We assume the Stimbus production team will enable integration of nim-waku.
4.  We assume Discovery mechanisms such as DNS and Discovery v5 will be worked on separately.
5.  We assume Core will, at some point, provide an UX for integrating payment of services.
6.  We assume the desktop client is sufficiently usable.
7.  We assume Core and Infra will investigate ways of improving MaxPeers.

<a id="org1414f44"></a>

> # Next steps

Reviewer: Do we want this in the post

Author: removed
